# elena-olekh-essay
# **Application letter for ADA Developers Academy**

My name is Elena Olekh and first of all I am a mother of two amazing girls. I and my family moved to the Seattle area almost two years ago from Israel, following my husband’s job opportunity. In Israel, I studied biotechnology engineering and since I completed my studies I worked in that field. First for a couple of years I worked in research and then as a regulatory affairs specialist at a pharmaceutical company. Wherever I worked I enjoyed my work, the companies and the people I worked with.

Moving to US gave me the opportunity to look deep into myself and my path and to reconsider who I want to be.
While evaluating my life in Seattle, I wasn’t convinced that I want to proceed engaging in the same occupation as I had in Israel, despite the fact that I was really good at it and very much enjoyed my work.
While looking for a position in the Seattle area I realized that any path I chose required me getting additional education, so I started questioning myself of which career path to pursue. A question I repeatedly asked myself was what I prefer to do or study, shall I widen my knowledge in my comfort zone or route myself in new direction, where I have the opportunity to learn something different, exciting and new, where I will be able to make even a greater impact. 
While asking myself so many difficult questions, I started feeling very uncertain, as I worked all my adult life and now I wasn’t sure what the future holds for me. My husband, a software engineer, as always came to my rescue and started to ask me logical question to distract me from my thoughts. Unexpectedly, I had so much fun answering those questions, that I forgot I was sad. Then he explained me that those are similar questions to ones that people are asked in a professional interview for a software engineer position, and I was amazed that I could answer them. This made me want to learn more. In the past, while getting my Bachelor’s degree, I had a very bad experience with learning programming language, when the first semester I had to take a C language class. I was overwhelmed by everything and it made me skeptical about my abilities in this field. Nevertheless, being more calm and mature now days, I decided to try and study a programing language, Python. I have joined online tutorial of “codecademy” and was surprised how much fun I had completing levels and assignments learning Python language and its implementations, repeating tutorials in order to comprehend better specific part or make sure I had understood how to implement a function.  Suddenly my experience was completely different from years ago, and it made me wanting to learn more. Although I just have started, I can’t stop learning as much as I can, filling my days with thinking about problem solving and better ways to write the code. It is amazing and uplifting and I have never thought programming will have such an effect on me. I hope my next step will be writing the functions myself, every time I use a certain built-in function I am trying to figure out how it was created and written.

Undergoing this experience, I understood, that many years ago I made a mistake determining programming is not for me, believing that I could never learn or succeed in that field. Studying C language at my freshman year at the University was so overwhelming, I couldn’t imagine that I can learn and ever understand programming. I just studied enough to pass the test and was convinced I would never need it in my future as a professional biotechnology engineer. I passed the course and continued with my life convinced that I will never be able or asked to do this. I couldn’t be more wrong. Programming is involved in every occupation this days. In biotechnology field it is involved in every instrument you use, bioinformatics, regulatory submission portals, databases used by every company, clinical trials control, medical devices development and implementation and those are only few examples.  In addition, from years of experience I gained and became more mature, I can see why I had hard time during C language classes and exercises. Being much younger and inexperienced, I tried to conquer all at once, I did not divide the problem into smaller pieces and phases, and nobody really taught me what the right approach is. Today I know that if I want, I can be a great software engineer, I can learn programing and I can be successful in it. And I totally want it. 

Being a regulatory affairs professional I have discovered that the things I loved in my profession resemble the things important in programming. Being able to describe the problem and negotiate with my colleague ways to resolve it. Compiling a submission file in the way that it will be approved. Correct project management and time division are often the key to project success. Projects always include planning, reviewing, writing and maintaining relationships with people involved in the project, including developers of the product as well as testing methods and manufacturing. I was required to receive information from all the above to complete my projects, I often reviewed other people work and asked for corrections. I had to see the big picture, deeply understand the product starting from development through manufacturing and testing to be able to generate an accurate submission file to the regulatory authorities for the drug product to get approved. 

From my discussions with my husband I realized it is the same with software development, they all work together to create the best product for the customers. Each of the involved has a part in the success. This made me want to be a part of it too. I envision contributing my part of the code to the product would have the same rush feeling as submitting a product file for FDA approval. It seems to me that assembling the submission file on all its parts resembles contributing my part of the software, all I really need is to apply my old skillset enhanced by newfound ability to write code. 

I remember while working on one on my first major submissions I needed assistance from one of the product developers. I contacted him via email and didn’t receive any answer from him for a couple of days. Regulatory submissions have very specific and uncompromising deadlines and I couldn’t wait for his response any longer. I was offended and contacted him again, once more via email. When I didn’t receive any response the next day I was very mad. I called him and set up a meeting. However, at the meeting I discovered a very nice and cooperative person that just needed personal attention and help with writing and describing the response. By personal approach saved a lot of time that would be wasted communicating through emails. After this accident that put me in stressful position I learned that I need personal approach to few of my colleague and sometimes one hour meeting can save a lot of precious time. I had a lot of experience of unresponsive people subsequently and I always found that the meeting solution was the best. While we met and discussed the issues, we could better contribute to the company needs solving the problems through collaboration.

Five years from now I can see myself working for a large company as part of a product team, driving my part of the project to completion. Maybe I will manage the entire project. Getting hold of programming languages and being great at problem solving, should allow this dream to come true. It is possible that this future position will even be in a medical devices company, developing a breakthrough medical device where I will be able to put in action both the new software and the old bio skills, driving the project to success. However I am not limiting myself, as long as I will be able to learn and contribute, it can be any other field of industry. I believe software is the future, it is everywhere and I want to be on the front line of technological progress. 

Only recently I have heard from a friend about ADA, whom I told about my rising interest in programming, and she recommended me to apply. After getting knowledgeable about the program I can’t stop telling about it to my other friends, encouraging them to apply too. It is amazing to get an opportunity to learn programming professionally in a short period. Although programming is new for me, I hope that I will be able to learn more on my own, before the classes start in summer, so I will be more prepared for the program. I also was very happy to learn that the program is six month of intense studying as it suites very well my character, as I have always learned fast and intensively and I prefer this way of studying. I love that the program is based on helping women rediscover themselves in a field of programming. Relocating to another country always comes with new acknowledgement of yourself. Changing your surroundings and comfort zone for me, as a woman and a mother, it seems even harder. I really appreciate the existence of this program allowing woman as myself to learn programming and becoming professional in a short period of time and by that implementing ADA’s vision in increasing the number of underrepresented skilled software developers and empowering woman. 
I have an amazing husband that will be able to help me while supporting and taking care of our family for this period when I will be turning my life into a new direction.
I would greatly appreciate if you considered to include me in the program. 

Sincerely,

Elena
